title: 'Recap: "Things You Love" Lightning Talks'
slug: things-you-love
category: blog
author: Kevin Ngo <ngoke@onid.oregonstate.edu>

image:
    url: http://i.imgur.com/yGMWT.jpg
    where: right
tags: meeting

featured: True

date: 2012-02-14

---

Oh, the love is in the air. For Valentine's Day, LUG got together and shared
pieces of software or technology that they loved.

###rTorrent - Jacques Uber###
Tell subsonic to look at directory where music is downloaded. rTorrent watches
a directory for new torrents. When it sees one it downloads it. Subsonic then
sees the new media file, indexes it, and serves it. You can simply scp a
torrent file over and it will automatically torrent and serve it. Ready to
listen!

###Flask - Corbin Simpson###
Flask is a Python web framework that lets you create website
insanely fast yet scales well.

        import flask
        app = flask.Flask(__name__)

        counter = 0

        @app.route("/")
        def index():
            global counter
            counter + = 1
            return """<p>I &hearts; flask!</p>"
                <p>I have been viewed %d times</p>""" % (counter)


        @app.route("/blink/<int:d>") # parameter d
        def blink(d):
            return """<blink>Do I blink?</blink><p>
                You entered %d.</p>""" % d

Don't need any additional folders/files/settings besides above.
It just works; no need to have your views here and your urls
there.

###Puppet - Daniel Thornton###
Puppet is a program that lets you configure computers from a set
of configuration files. It has modules that configures various
applications.

Can install vim and move vim configs to appropriate directory.
Install all files and sets up all programs.

###Radio Repeaters - Anthony Odenthal###
Wake up seldom-used 77-repeater on roof of Dearborn. Gave a call
sign, radio did some cool beeping. Responded with call sign in Morse
"W7-OSU-R" -R indicates it is a repeater. Responded with
voice emulator. If cell phones go down, the repeater still works.

Like an old school IRC.

Valentine's Day has a history of romance on the radio network.

###units - Mike Cooper###
units is a unit converter and calculator.

        You have: 2+2
        You want:
            Definition: 4

        You have: 2 kilometers/second
        You want: mph
            * 4473.8726
            / 0.00022352

        You have: 1 parsec
        You want: feet
            * 1.2148337e+24
            / 8.2315794e-25

        You have: 30 miles / gallon
        You want: acre
            reciprocal conversion
            * 1.9374186e-11
            / 5.1615073e+10

ipcalc shows network, min/max host, broadcast
        $ ipcalc 128.193.0.0/16

###Synapse - Kevin Ngo ###
Synapse is a launcher program that you can use to pull
up any program, document, file or SSH, upload to imgur
simply by typing what you want. It will autocomplete
for you and give you a list of matches.

You can install via the PPA:

        $ add-apt-repository ppa:synapse-core/ppa
        $ apt-get update
        $ apt-get install synapse

###LyX - Brian Sherson###
WYSIWYG editor for LaTeX. You can type a document and it will dynamically
output what the .tex file. You can use it to take easily very pretty notes
in math classes or type math labs, or anything else in general.

###Terminator and Nyan-Cat - Mike Cooper###
Terminator is a tiling terminal window manager where you can split,
tile, tab, and group terminals.

Also, NYAN CAT.
