title: "Why Join LUG?"
category: blog
slug: whylug
author: Chance Zibolski <chance.zibolski@gmail.com>

image:
    url: http://www.adafruit.com/adablog/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/screenshot.jpg
    where: right
datetime: 2013-01-11 17:00:00

---

## Reasons to come to LUG

1) We're open to all levels of experience. You don't have to know anything
about Linux to come. We do a lot of things more related to open source
technology than Linux.

2) Being familiar with Linux is a valuable asset when looking for a
job/internship. You are more than likely going to run into a situation
requiring basic Linux knowledge at some point in your career.

3) A lot of your future classes will be made easier by being comfortable with
Linux and other open source software. CS311 and CS411 - Operating Systems -
require you to use Linux throughout the course on our schools servers.

## Information About Install Fest

The Install fest is aimed at a variety of skill levels. You only need your
laptop and power supply, and we'll provide everything else. Expert Linux users
will be there to walk everyone through the installation steps to ensure your
data is safe.

## Notes

**You can have both Linux, and your other Operating System installed at the
same time!**

So long as you have a rather modern computer, you will have a plethora of
options for installing Linux, including installing to a VirtualMachine,
seperate boot options, and even installing as an application to Windows. If
you have any concerns, we'll be happy to help you identify the best option for
you.

### About me, and how LUG has influenced me

I am a sophomore at OSU, and I came into OSU with very little actual
programming experience. The first LUG meeting I attended was because Jacques
Uber, a current LUG member, came to my CS151 class Winter term, and Kevin
Mcgrath told us we had to learn the Vim or Emacs text editor. Jacques told our
class that LUG was a good place to learn those skills.
I installed Ubuntu after joining in LUG, and slowly started using its features
more and more. Since then I have not gone back to Windows, and I use Linux as
my main operating system. As a result of LUG I've been exposed to a huge
amount of open source software, and I've learned a ton.
Just about a year later, I am now working at the OSU Open Source Lab as a
student software developer. It is by far is the best job I could ever ask for,
and I don't think I'd have gotten this far today without LUG.
- Chance Zibolski

