title: Hints on Running a University LUG
category: blog
tags: guide
author: "Emily Dunham <dunhame@onid.oregonstate.edu>"
date: 2014-02-14
---

So, you want to start a LUG? DO IT! Here are some hints that I've picked up in
2 years as President and 1 year as Vice President of the OSU LUG. 

## Resources

Your first task is to evaluate what already exists in your community, to
determine whether a LUG is needed. 

### Current and former local LUGs and friends

Has your campus ever had a LUG? If so, find its web site and mailing list. Use
the names, IRC handles, and your Facebook and LinkedIn stalking skills to
track down the LUG's former leaders and reach out to them to see whether
they'd be willing to advise and mentor you in resurrecting their old group. 

Other people who might know about old LUGs include CS faculty, academic
advisors (if they've worked at the university for longer than you've been
there), and the full-time network services staff who run mailing lists and
student organization web hosting. 

### Alumni

If you can get ahold of an old LUG's mailing list, it's a valuable tool for
recruiting alumni who are pursuing Linux-related jobs in the area to speak at
meetings or help you find speakers. 

Make friends with these people -- they're one of your best resources for
advice on how student groups work at your particular university. 

### Student-org support on your campus

Larger universities often have an association for student clubs. Ask the
leaders of an existing club who to talk to about becoming an official student
organization. The office where you sign up for that status often has a variety
of resources for leadership development, club recruitment, industry
relationships, and other advice specific to your university. 

### Shell server

Do students at your university have access to a shell server where they can
run persistent IRC or just mess around with Linux? If you don't know, talk to
the Computer Science department and university network administrators or
helpdesk to find out. 

If a shell server isn't provided by your university, consider setting one up
for LUG members. IRC is a critical tool for LUG engagement, and students need
access to somewhere they can set up a persistent session. 

### Conferences

Are there any open-source-related tech conferences in your city or state? Talk
to the conference organizers about getting free or discounted admission to at
least the exhibit hall. While conference talks are cool, you can often watch
them online later. The exhibit hall is where you network with local
businesses, ask them nicely to donate promotional items with their company's
branding which your group can in turn distribute to students as free handouts
or prizes in coding competitions, and make connections with possible speakers
for your meetings. 

### Local companies

Compile a list of all the companies in your city who use Linux or other Open
Source software in any capacity. Connect with them to explain how the skills
that students learn by participating in a LUG will benefit their businesses,
and ask them what open source-related skills they'd like to see in prospective
new employees. Use this feedback to make your meetings and content more useful
to the students who get involved. 

Think outside the box. For instance, a LUG in Detroit won't be near many tech
startups, but they could research the places where Linux is used in the
automotive manufacturing industry, such as production line robots and test
equipment. By connecting with a company who hires technicians to develop and
maintain those embedded systems, they can not only improve their group's
usefulness to students by preparing them for likely careers, but possibly
score some neat hardware to practice programming on. 

### National organizations

Does your school have an ACM chapter or Ubuntu LoCo group, or an active branch
of the Mozilla ambassador program? Talk to them! Depending on your user base,
consider starting one of these groups in conjunction with the LUG, because
support and mentorship from the national organization will benefit the LUG as
well as the more specialized group's chapter. 

## Group Culture

## Recruitment

### Posters


### Classes
### Other Clubs
### Campus Departments

## Running Meetings

### Herding cats
### Staying on topic
### Getting feedback

## Events

### Planning
### Publicity
### Delegation

## IRC Channels

### Main channel
### Side-channel

## Website

### URL
### Campus hosting
### Information to include
### Updates
### Mailing list
### IRC information
[officers]:http://lug.oregonstate.edu/contact/

