title: "LUG's Laptop Reviews"
category: blog
slug: thinkpads
author: Emily Dunham <dunhame@onid.orst.edu>

image:
    url: http://cdn.ubergizmo.com/photos/2007/5/thinkpad-santa-rosa.jpg
    where: right
datetime: 2015-01-28 17:00:00

---

The #osu-lug channel on Freenode has recently seen a lot of requests for
advice on choosing laptops. Here's a summary of the advice you're likely to
get from each channel member. 

## edunham

### Preferences

I play a bit of Minecraft and occasionally like to compile code or run VMs
locally, so a machine's performace is moderately important. Most of my
schoolwork and real work is done on remote machines while I'm at home or on
campus, so I need at least a couple hours of battery life and good wireless
performance. I usually run Linux Mint or Arch on laptops, and am not a fan of
troubleshooting proprietary driver problems. 

Display quality is not important to me and I don't mind small screens.
Input devices are extremely important to me. I strongly prefer the old style
Thinkpad keyboards and find chicklets unpleasant to type on. The [xkcd
mouse](http://xkcd.com/243/) is my preferred pointing device, so physical
buttons at the top of the touchpad are important to me. I find "clicky"
touchpads difficult to use and dislike integrated buttons. 

### Thinkpad x100e/x120e

They're tiny, light, cheap, and have a flimsy feel compared to "real"
Thinkpads. I got an X100e in my freshman year (2010) and it was fine for
schoolwork, though it tended to heat up badly when playing Minecraft and the
chicklet keyboard was less than ideal. Linux Mint worked out of the box. 

I was carrying the X100e in a non-padded bag with a bunch of other stuff,
dropped it wrong on a tile floor, and the outside of the screen suffered a
sharp impact which caused the display to crack. I replaced it with an X120e,
which was lighter and didn't overheat quite as badly. The batteries of the two
models are interchangeable, as is standard for models within the same Thinkpad
line, which is extremely convenient. 

### Thinkpad T420?

Intel issued it to me during my internship in the summer of 2012. Nice
machine, bombproof-feeling construction, but I found it huge and unwieldy and
it weighed a TON. The keyboard spoiled me for life, and desire for the same
type of keyboard factored into my decision to retire my X120e. 

### Thinkpad X230

Got it new in September 2012, when the model had just been released, due to a
Lenovo store discount for Intel employees at the end of my internship. 

Pros: 
    * light
    * nice screen
    * good specs for the time, 4GB RAM, Intel Core i5 processor, etc.
    * came with option to not include webcam, since I was buying it new
    * xkcd mouse has physical buttons at top of touchpad
Cons: 
    * Chicklet keyboard
    * Clicky touchpad
    * Linux didn't Just Work immediately -- I "fixed" this with the classic
      technique of waiting a couple months then trying again

After having used a nice Thinkpad keyboard all summer, the chicklet keyboard
that shipped with the X230 annoyed me so badly that I ordered an X220 keyboard
(the old style of keys, and more or less the same form factor), dremeled down
the bits that didn't fit, and stuffed it into the X230 chassis. All the
regular keys work fine; the delete/home/end keys in the upper right don't
perform the same functions as they're labeled with but I've just memorized
their new positions and it's not annoying enough to warrant figuring out how
to change their mappings in software. From 2013 onward, Linux Mint and Arch
have Just Worked on this machine. 

It shipped with a 3-cell battery, which slowly wore out until it only held
about 2 hours' charge when it was 3 years old. Upgraded to an SSD and 9-cell
battery in 2014 and can now get ~8 hours of battery life.  

### T440s

I was issued a T440s for my 2014 internship on the Urban Airship ops team.
It's a reasonable work machine, since work constitutes sitting in its docking
station hooked up to external keyboard, mouse, and monitor, impersonating a
desktop computer. 

However, I would never buy a T440s for my personal machine. Its build
construction is lightweight at the expense of the strurdiness that I've come
to expect with even the X2xx series, the chicklet keyboard is deeply
unpleasant to type on, and it lacks separate buttons to go with the xkcd
mouse. It took me several months to find the magic settings which allow me to
right-click when using the laptop as a laptop. It's also physically larger
than I need, which makes me find it awkward to use on the go. Plus it has the
new, rectangular power connector, instead of the old round one that's been
interchangeable on every other Thinkpad I've ever had.

It basically feels like Lenovo tried to impersonate a Mac, so you might like
this machine if you're a fan of Apple hardware. However, I buy Thinkpads
because I like the sturdy construction and boxy lines which make you feel like
you could bludgeon a wild animal to death with it and then happily resume
coding. The T440s is the furthest from classic Lenovo construction that I've
ever used, and I don't enjoy it.


### Other Advice

Assess your priorities for weight and battery life, then buy whatever battery
best fits your use case. The weight and performance differences between
battery sizes are huge. Plan on replacing your battery every 18 months or so
for optimal performance. 

If typing on your machine doesn't feel pleasant any more, try replacing the
keyboard. A new one is typically $15 to $30 and the difference between an old,
grungy laptop keyboard and a brand new one cannot be overstated. It makes it
feel like a new computer, in a way that cleaning the old keyboard just can't.


## mythmon

### Preferences

In many ways, I'm opposite of edunham in my laptop preferences. I'm out of
school, and I use my "work" laptop as my primary machine. I hate working on
remote systems for day to day work. I work locally most of the time. My laptop
spends about half it's time in some sort of desk setup, and the other half in
my lap. Portability is important, but so is expandibility with ports.

My day job involves hacking on a couple decently Django website. This means I
run Mariadb, Postgres, Redis, Memcached, Elasticsearch, and a bunch of other
services most of the time. In short, I need a decently beefy system. I run
Arch. I play some games, but anything graphically intensive goes on another
box. I like high resolution displays, though not too high density. More on this
later. I'm not a huge stickler about input, and I generally don't mind Apple
laptops (except the software). I never use the xkcd mouse.

### Thinkpad T420

#### Pros

* Sturdy
* Good screen
* Classic input

#### Cons

* Silly GPUs
* Huge

This was my first Thinkpad. It is huge by todays standards, but isn't that big
of a Thinkpad, thickness wise. Today it seems like a behemoth, but it was fine
then. It's bulk came with some advantages. It was quite sturdy, and served me
well for its lifetime. It had the old style non-chiclet keys and a class 5
button Thinkpad trackpad, but I went so far as to disable the nub or remove it
entirely sometimes.

I enjoyed it's docking port. It worked well for external headphones, mouse
keyboard, and a single extra monitor.

The single biggest problem with this laptop was it's graphics stack. It was a
dual GPU card, one Nvidia, one Intel. Running Windows, this would allow the
laptop to switch back and forth, or even use both, to achieve a good balance of
power and efficiency. In Linux however, getting this kind of feature is quite
challenging, especially in Arch. Virtual frame buffers, shipping rendered
frames between GPUs, etc. It's all a huge hassle. So in practice you have to
choose one or the other. Luckily the BIOS makes this extermely easy.

The next problem is that, for some reason, the external video ports are not
wired to both cards. The VGA port is wired only to the Intel card, and the
DisplayPort port is wired only to the Nvidia card. Additionally, all the shiny
video outputs on the Dock except the VGA portG are wired through to the Nvidia
card.

I chose efficiency over power, going with Intel GPU all the time. This means I
get analog video output, and limited choices. But it was still a nice system.


### Thinkpad X1 Carbon (Gen 2)

Pros

* Thin+Light
* Very high resolution screen
* Decent battery life

Cons

* Weird keyboard
* Very high resolution screen
* Weird ports
* Unreliable

This was my second thinkpad. Gone are the buttons on the trackpad, here is a
strange keyboard layout. This thinkpad uses the newer style buttonless
clickpad, and a very strange keyboard layout. It had things like the home and
end key sharing the space caps lock used to, moving ~ to to the right of the
space bar, and completely removing the F-key (F1, F2, etc) in favor of a light
up touch strip.

This sounds horrible. It looks awful. It is a chiclet style keyboard, so take
that as you will. That being said, I grew to tolerate, and in some cases even
enjoy it. The touch lights were always just barely passable, but I grew to
enjoy home/end in the wasted space of caps lock, and I still occasionally try
to hit ~ with my thumb. If you have to move back and forth between the laptop
keyboard and other keyboards, the constant switching sucks. If it's all you are
going to use, it can be usable.

This laptop has only a single Intel GPU, which worked great. The wireless card
worked fine as well. I forget what kind of video outputs it had, but they were
perfectly functional. All the usual boxes were checked. Except ethernet. The
X1's excuse for an ethernet port was a small, proprietary port that could take
a proprietary adaptor, which I prompty lost. Oh well.

The docking port on the bottom is gone in favor of a dock port on the side of
the laptop that doubles with the power cord. It works fine, but it isn't quite
as satisifying as dropping a laptop on a dock.

And then there is the screen. 2560x1440 on a 14" display. I stubornly ran it in
1x mode, instead of Retina-style 2x mode. After cranking up font sizes and
tweaking Firefox, it was usable for me, but anyone who looked at my laptop
wondered "How can you read that!?". There are of coures lower resolution
models.

The BIOS/UEFI firmware was a dream. Options for EFI boot management, secureboot
controls, nothing to complain about. This is as good as UEFI gets (and it is
pretty good). I opted for Linux Kernel Stubloader instead of Grub.

The biggest problem, and this is absolute killer, and makes me recommend
avoiding this model at all costs: quality. In six months I went through three
X1s. The first failed within a week, refusing to boot with a cryptic error
message. The next would run find for several hours, and then it's screen would
freak out and it would refuse to boot for a few cycles. The third lasted
several months before turning off and never turning on again.

Three warranty claims is too many. At this point I asked work to give me a
different model, which leads me to:

### Thinkpad X240

Pros

* Amazing battery life
* Dual batteries
* Small footprint

Cons

* A bit thick
* Low resolution screen (as configured)
* Dual batteries

This laptop is my favorite so far. It still has the clickpad, which I enjoy,
but is not a good choice for nubbin users. It has a real dock port on the
bottom. It has a neat trick with two batteries: one internal (btw, screwed and
wired in, no solder here), and one external. The external can be removed and
the laptop keeps running. It drains the external one first, then switches to
internal. Charging runs in reverse.

With both batteries, I easily get 6-10 hours of battery life. I've honestly
stopped paying attention to it, and I've never had it die.

The usual problem points of Linux laptops, installation, boot loaders, wifi,
and GPUs all behave nicely here. The BIOS/UEFI firmware is just like that on
the X1C, a dream compared to some others.

It is a bit bulky coming from the X1C, but if that is the price to pay for
reliability, I'll take it. It is still a feather compared to the T420.

I listed dual batteries under both Pro and Con. That's because as far as I can
tell, no tools will give me a *combined* runtime for both batteries. The software
support is a little lacking.

The screen on mine is only 1366x768, which is radically different than the
2560x1440 I had. The X1C is a bit too dense, but this is too sparse. I imagine
the 1080p option would be a good level, but this is what I got.
