title: Home
type: home
url: /index{page}.html

pagination:
    limit: 3
    post_limit: 9
---


# Welcome to the OSU LUG website!

- - - -

## The OSU Linux Users Group meets every week
## Tuesday at 6:00pm at Kelly Engineering Center in KEC 1007

- - - -

*Upcoming Event...*

## CoreOS Night Thursday February 11 @6pm | Kelly Engineering room 1003

**Thursday February 11, 2016 in Kelly Engineering Center room 1003 from 6pm to
8:30pm**, with **complimentary food and drinks** will be available at 6pm,
presentations will start at 6:30pm, a **Q&A** begin at 7:30pm, and
**information about working at CoreOS** will begin at 8:00 pm.

*This special event will be on a* **Thursday**, *unlike our usual meetings*.

### The Lifetime of a CoreOS Machine (Alex Crawford)

One of the tenets of CoreOS is that machines should be fairly ephemeral - it
should be simple and straightforward to throw away a machine and bring up
another in its place. This talk will cover the tools and techniques that make
this possible; covering provisioning, in-place updates, coordinated reboots,
and future work.

### A Brief Introduction to Distributed Trusted Computing (Matthew Garrett)

There's been plenty of work to figure out how to make sure that the container
you deploy is the container you thought you deployed, and even more on how to
avoid one container from being able to break into other containers. But
trusting these containers is still difficult - how do you know whether
everything your containers depend on can be trusted?

This talk will discuss the technologies we're using at CoreOS to verify the
state of a system, from the firmware to the filesystem. How do we ensure that a
system only boots the OS we wanted it to boot? How do we prove that later
components weren't interfered with? And how can we use the same technology to
make it easier to deploy servers to untrusted data centers?

- - - -

### What is the Oregon State University Linux Users Group?

We are self described as "mostly a group of nerds. However we are not your
normal nerds. We are a highly active and self-organizing group dedicated to
teaching and advocating free and open source software (FOSS) on campus."

That might sound like we are on a bit of a high horse; put simply we are a
group of students and community members in and around Oregon State University
that believe in the use of and contribution to [Free and Open Source
Software][foss] (FOSS). In practice this means we contribute to the tools we
use and the use the tools we love.

If you don't yet use Linux, or you want to learn more about FOSS, come to a
meeting. We don't bite -- but we might offer you pizza.

### How do I participate?

Participation is completely voluntary and non-compulsory; show up to a meeting
when you can at any point during the Fall, Winter, Spring term.

When are are not at meetings, we keep in touch via...

* the OSULUG [mailing list][ml] where we post about events and useful
  information, and
* the `#osu-lug` IRC channel on `irc.freenode.net`.
    * For more info on IRC, check out our [guide to getting on IRC][ircguide].

**If you're currently an OSU student and would like to become an official
voting member of LUG**, please fill out this [member form][form].

Keep an eye out for helpful information and upcoming events posted here. We
also have lunch together on Fridays, at a time determined in the IRC channel.

LUG is also on [GitHub][gh] if you would like to read our Laws and the source
code for this website.

### Is there anything else like LUG at OSU?

The [DevOps BootCamp][dobc] program, run by the [Open Source Lab][OSL], teaches
students how to develop web applications (think: Facebook, Twitter, etc)
software and run Linux servers (think: The Cloud). This program is free to
attend, no strings attached.

[gh]:https://github.com/osulug/

[form]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dDIySHZQeHNhbFhkd25uaTFUNEZubnc6MQ
[ircguide]: /blog/irc/
[ml]: http://lists.oregonstate.edu/mailman/listinfo/linux
[people]: http://lug.oregonstate.edu/contact/

[foss]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_and_open-source_software

[OSL]: http://osuosl.org
[dobc]: http://devopsbootcamp.osuosl.org
