title: IRC
category: guides
author: Emily Dunham <dunhame@onid.oregonstate.edu>
---
[Internet Relay Chat][irc] is a protocol in the application layer of the
internet. Much of the LUG's communication happens in the `#osu-lug` channel on
freenode, an IRC network that provides discussion facilities to free and open
source software communities. There are two ways that you can get into the
channel right now, each with benefits and drawbacks.

[irc]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IRC

Quick & Easy
============

To access freenode from your browser, you can use their [web interface][freenodeweb]. In
the Nickname field, enter the name that you want other people to see when you
talk in the channel. This can be your ONID username, your real name, or
something more creative. Note that if you pick a really long nick (I tried it
with "`testing_freenode_web_chat`"), it will be truncated at around 16
characters (so I only show up as "`testing_freenode`" in the channel). In the
channels field, type `#osu-lug`. Enter the capcha, click connect, wait a few
seconds, and you'll be in the LUG's primary discussion area.

[freenodeweb]: http://webchat.freenode.net/

What do they see?
-----------------

When I joined a channel with my nick set to `testing_freenode`, it looks like
this when I join:

    15:54 -!- testing_freenode [8cd3a70d@gateway/web/freenode/ip.140.211.167.13] has joined #osu-lug

and like this when I leave:

    16:04 -!- testing_freenode [8cd3a70d@gateway/web/freenode/ip.140.211.167.13] has quit [Quit: Page closed]

GUI clients
===========

If you prefer chat interface like what you're familiar with in Gmail or Yahoo,
consider one of these options:

XXX list of options and links to tutorials XXX

Be a Ninja
==========

If you try IRC with the browser client and like it, you should set up a
permanent IRC session. This way, you won't be logged out of IRC each time you
close your browser, you can identify yourself with a unique nickname and
register it to prevent others from impersonating you, and have more convenient
features available. If these instructions seem intimidating, just come to a
LUG meeting and we'll be happy to walk you through setting things up.

You want to keep your session running all the time, to hear discussions that
happen while you're away from your computer and avoid spamming your friends'
channels with annoying "`your_nick has joined!`" and "`your_nick has left...
timed out`" messages. To do this, you can run your IRC client on a computer
that you trust to always be on, and log in to it remotely from anywhere you can
get internet access and a terminal.

1.  Open a terminal. If you're in Windows, install [PuTTY][putty]. Then ssh into
    shell.onid.oregonstate.edu...  ssh youronid@shell.onid.oregonstate.edu
    Since my onid is dunhame, I type ssh dunhame@shell.onid.oregonstate.edu in
    my linux terminal, or

    XXX FILL THIS IN LATER XXX

    in PuTTY. If you haven't connected before, it'll throw an unknown host
    message.  Tell it that it's okay to connect anyways. Once you're in, it
    will pop up some standard sort of disclaimer, then allow you to enter your
    password.

2.  We'll now set up a persistent IRC session with Screen and Irssi. [Here][screenirssi] is an
    excellent tutorial explaining what the Screen/Irssi setup is and why you
    should care.

    XXX FILL THIS IN LATER XXX

[putty]: http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/
[screenirssi]: http://lizzie.spod.cx/screenirssi.shtml

Etiquette
=========

or, People Are More Helpful If You Aren't Annoying

-   Lurk moar
