title: Spencer Krum (nibalizer) talks about TINC
datetime: 2016-02-16 18:00:00
category: events
slug: meeting20160216
preview: In the past, the network was a safer place. I personally never lived in this time, but I can imagine it being great.
location: Kelly Engineering Center 1007

---

Here's a blurb to get you ready:

In the past, the network was a safer place. The difference between a
workstation and a server was a bit more vague. Desktops had apache web servers
and NFS mounts coming from them. Workstations could run finger and connect to
other hosts on the network. Printers were available to anyone who could
broadcast onto the network. Video was shipped across the network to random
hosts or multicast addresses. Security wasn't something we worried about
because we trusted everyone on the network.

I personally never lived in this time, but I can imagine it being great. The
early network was energized by awesome protocols for file sharing, video,
communication, and peripherals. What I did experience was the last hoorah of
this kind of 'open' network during my time at University.

My friends and I have deployed a peer-to-peer mesh network using Tinc
(http://www.tinc-vpn.org/). This technology allows us to build an overlay
network on the public internet that looks like a flat layer 3 network. Tinc
networks are encrypted using SSL. Since we (mostly)trust everyone on the
network, and all communication is encrypted, we can do things with our network
that we've not been able to do before.

Given a secure way to do insecure things, a number of protocols that had been
left in the wastebucket are back in play. NFS, UPnP, 515(print spooler),
79(finger) and more can be used securely in this network. This means our
computers can behave more like the workstations of old, and we can live that
glorious unix workstation heyday.

In addition, our laptops now have permanent IP addresses that have transparent
encryption to other nodes on the network. This opens the door for all kinds of
cool automation and tricks, that will be shown in this talk. This quickly
became a service discovery problem and we deployed Consul (https://consul.io/)
to detect service availability and to provide name services into the network.

When: 6pm

Where: Kelly Engineering Center room 1007
