title: CoreOS Night
datetime: 2016-02-11 06:00:00
category: events
slug: meeting20160211
preview: Guest Speakers Matthew Garrett and Alex Crawford from CoreOS come to speak for LUG.
location: Kelly Engineering Center 1003

---

[CoreOS](https://coreos.com/) leaders Matthew Garrett and Alex Crawford will be
speaking day about Linux, Containers, and more!

## CoreOS Night February 11 @6pm | Kelly Engineering room 1003

**February 11, 2016 in Kelly Engineering Center room 1003 from 6pm to 8:30pm**,
with **complimentary food and drinks** will be available at 6pm,  presentations
will start at 6:30pm, a **Q&A** begin at 7:30pm, and **information about
working at CoreOS** will begin at 8:00 pm.

### The Lifetime of a CoreOS Machine (Alex Crawford)

One of the tenets of CoreOS is that machines should be fairly ephemeral - it
should be simple and straightforward to throw away a machine and bring up
another in its place. This talk will cover the tools and techniques that make
this possible; covering provisioning, in-place updates, coordinated reboots,
and future work.

### A Brief Introduction to Distributed Trusted Computing (Matthew Garrett)

There's been plenty of work to figure out how to make sure that the container
you deploy is the container you thought you deployed, and even more on how to
avoid one container from being able to break into other containers. But
trusting these containers is still difficult - how do you know whether
everything your containers depend on can be trusted?

This talk will discuss the technologies we're using at CoreOS to verify the
state of a system, from the firmware to the filesystem. How do we ensure that a
system only boots the OS we wanted it to boot? How do we prove that later
components weren't interfered with? And how can we use the same technology to
make it easier to deploy servers to untrusted data centers?

When: 6pm

Where: Kelly Engineering Center room 1001
