title: Getting Started with Digital Ocean
category: blog
tags: guide
author: ["Lucy Wyman <wymanl@oregonstate.edu>"]
datetime: 2015-10-06 00:00:00
---

[Digital Ocean][do] is an accessible cloud computing resource, which 
will give you access to a system without needing to maintain it or
give up your current set up.  It's great for getting familiar with
linux, testing projects, and even deploying an application. Here's 
how to get started.

Through the [github education pack][education], you get $50 of 
credit to Digital Ocean for free! This is about 10 months of usage,
depending on what you're using it for.  To get the credit:
1. Click the "Request a Discount" button in the top-right-hand corner
   of the github education pack page. 
2. Fill out the form as is appropriate for you (you almost certainly 
   want an individual account, unless you know otherwise), and make 
   sure you use your Oregon State email address when sending the 
   request, **even if this is not the email you have your github 
   account with**.  
3. Within a few days you should get an email confirming your 
   university account.  Then, if you go back to the [github education
   pack][education] page, there should be a discount key waiting for
   you. 
4. Go to [Digital Ocean][do] and sign up for an account, using the
   key provided by github in the Coupon section
5. Now you can make a droplet! Login to Digital Ocean, and click the
   green "Create a Droplet" button in the top-right-hand corner.
6. If you're not sure what you want, name your droplet something 
   sensible ("Schoolwork", "Learning Linux", "IRC", etc.), then choose
   the $5/month sized machine -- this will more than likely be 
   more than enough space for right now.
7. Select either the San Francisco or New York Regions, and the 
   default ubuntu version.  
8. If you would like for your droplet to be even more secure, you can 
   create an ssh key by running ``ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -C "your_email@example.com"``
   and add the public key (copy-paste it) to DO.  This is encouraged!
9. Click "Create Droplet", and you're good to go!  You can now run
   ``ssh root@<IP Address>`` and either enter your password or 
   authenticate with ssh (won't require action from you) and BOOM!
   you're in a VM on the cloud!

Congratulations! You've successfully spun up a Digital Ocean droplet.



[do]: https://www.digitalocean.com/
[education]: https://education.github.com/pack
