title: Linux Filesystem Hierarchy Primer, A Guide for Windows Users
category: blog
tags: guide
slug: fshguide
author: "Wade Cline <clinew@onid.oregonstate.edu>"
date: 2013-01-31

---

This guide will provide a brief introduction to the Linux Filesystem Hierarchy
(LFSH; ie, the filesystem *layout*) for those familiar with Windows. The first
section will clarify any terminology used, the second section will address
frequently asked questions (FAQs) about the LFSH, and the third section will
provide a brief rundown of the LFSH. The goal is to help new Linux users figure
out where things are located.

note: Linux has directories; Windows has folders. They're basically the same thing.

# FAQs

## "Where is `Program Files`?"

Linux has no single location for most of its executable (think `\*.exe`) files.
Instead, these files may be located in one of multiple, mostly pre-determined,
locations. Most notably:

* `/bin` contains non-administrator executable files necessary for system
  booting.
* `/sbin` contains administrator executable files necessary for system booting.
* `/usr/bin` contains non-administrator executable files *not* necessary for
  system booting.
* `/usr/sbin` contains administrator executable files *not* necessary for
  system booting.

This probably seems a bit overly-complex at first; well, it'll soon get a bit
more complex, but will then be simplified. While the directories above most
often contain many important executable files, they are not necessarily the
directories that will be searched when you try and execute a command via the
command line. Specifically, the directories that will be searched consist of a
colon-separated list of directories in the PATH environment variable. To see
this environemnt variable, type:

    echo $PATH

On my system, this gives:

    /usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/opt/bin:/usr/i686-pc-linux-gnu/gcc-bin/4.5.4:/usr/games/bin

Should I decide to run a command via the command line, the executable file for
that command will be searched for in the following directories (with the
top-most directory in the list being the first directory searched):

- `/usr/local/bin`
- `/usr/bin`
- `/bin`
- `/opt/bin`
- `/usr/i686-pc-linux-gnu/gcc-bin/4.5.4`
- `/usr/games/bin`

The command line processor will go through each of the directories until it
finds an executable file whose filename matches the command specified, at which
point it will stop searching and execute the matching file.

Now, say I have multiple versions of the GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP)
installed in various locations and am curious which version is executing when I
run it via the command line; the above is an annoyingly long list of
directories to have to go through by hand, so, instead of searching each
directory by hand, I can simply run the `which` command to find out where the
executable file is located. For example:

    which gimp

returns:

    /usr/bin/gimp

Thus one can determine where their `Program Files` are by running the `which`
command, and by searching the directories in their `PATH` environment variable.
Note that there may be other executable files on the system besides the ones
which are immediately visible to the user.

## "Where is my `Trash Bin`?"

Maybe.

The `Trash Bin` is not a directory belonging to the filesystem hierarchy
itself; instead, the `Trash Bin` is most often implemented by the desktop
environment and its window manager. You cannot rely on there being a `Trash
Bin` on all installations of Linux; furthermore, there is often not an easy way
to access the `Trash Bin` via the command line. What this means is that you
should be very careful when deleting files via the command line in Linux, and
also cautious when deleting them via your desktop environment.

### "So then what's this `lost+found` directory?"

Short answer: Don't worry about it; it's not a `Trash Bin`.

Long answer: The `lost+found` directory is a special directory belonging to the
ext\* series of filesystems (ext2, ext3, ext4) that usually appears at the base
(specifically, the *mount point*) of the filesystem. Sometimes (hopefully
rarely), bad things will happen to the filesystem, and chunks of data, known as
*blocks*, may be lost and will not appear to belong to any file. In that case,
those blocks of data are taken and placed into the `lost+found` directory
during a filesystem stability (called *consistency*) check; the system
administrator can then use the blocks of data in the `lost+found` directory to
help recover any files with missing data.

## "Where is my data stored?"

The specifics may actually vary depending on how the system administrator
decides to set up the filesystem, but your data is most often stored in:

- /home/<username>

So, if your username happens to be `vladimir`, your data would probably be
located in:

- /home/vladimir

From there, everything else depends on your desktop environment and/or how you
choose to organize your files.

## "Where are my configuration files?"

Most user-specific configuration files are stored in "hidden" text files known
as *dot files*. Dot files are files whose names are prefixed with a dot (`.`),
and are often located in the user's home directory; having their name prefixed
with a dot keeps them hidden from normal `ls` commands; for example, running
`ls` on my machine shows:

    Desktop  blake  cuda  hobby  media  software  work

but running `ls -a` (the `-a` shows *all* files) shows:

    .              .crawl                .gsview.ini     .vim
    ..             .dbus                 .kde4           .viminfo
    .TrueCrypt     .dmrc                 .lesshst        .xsession-errors
    .Xauthority    .dvdcss               .libreoffice    Desktop
    .adobe         .fontconfig           .links          blake
    .bash_history  .gforth-history       .local          cuda
    .bash_logout   .gimp-2.6             .macromedia     hobby
    .bash_profile  .git-completion.bash  .mozilla        media
    .bashrc        .gitconfig            .recently-used  software
    .cache         .gnupg                .ssh            work
    .cddb          .gnuplot_history      .swp
    .config        .gstreamer-0.10       .thumbnails


Most of these hidden files are configuration files or are directories leading
to configuration files for their respective programs; for example, `.gnupg` is
a directory for configuration files belonging to the GNU Privacy Guard program.

System-wide configuration files are mostly located in the `/etc` directory, and
require administrative access.

## "Where do my external drives (USB storage device ('USB stick'), &c) appear?"

Short answer: They are usually found under the `/media` directory once you have
chosen to open (more specifically, *mount*) them via your desktop environment
and window manager. In rarer cases, they may also be under the `/mnt`
directory.

Long answer: Anywhere and multiple places! I'll use a USB storage device as an
example. The *block device* file (think: every single byte of data on the
device, including filesystem metadata) for the USB stick will usually appear
under the `/dev` directory (see the relevant entry below). The filesystem data
itself may appear at a *mount point* that is created automatically by the
system or is instead specified by the user; for example, one may choose to
display the contents of their filesystem under `/home/vladimir/usb_stick`
rather than `/media/usb_stick` by correctly invoking the `mount` command (the
invocation of which is outside the scope of this document). In either case, the
*block device* is still located under the `/dev` directory while the contents
of the block device may be easily accessed at the *mount point*
`/home/vladimir/usb_stick`.

## Where are my hard drives ('C:', 'D:', &c) located?

Hard drives, like USB storage devices (see above), have a corresponding *block
device* file in the '/dev' directory. This even includes the hard drive that
your Linux machine is currently running on (which is usually '/dev/sda'). This
is because, from an abstract standpoint, there is no difference between a hard
drive and a USB storage device, since both provide the same functionality
(random access storage).

# The Filesystem Hierarchy

The following is a brief introduction to the actual layout of a Linux
filesystem. First, the three levels of hierarchy, which I have decided to call
*tiers*, of a Linux filesystem are explained, then some directories that are
often common to multiple tiers are listed, and lastly certain specific
directories are listed.

Note that most distributions of Linux have additional directories that are not
listed here, and, furthermore, the system administrator is often free to change
the layout in order to suit their needs.

## The Three Tiers.

Each tier of a Linux filesystem is meant to serve a specific purpose. These
purposes are mostly of relevance to system administrators, but are useful for
the average user to know.

### `/`

The `/` directory, known as the *root directory*, is the basis of the entire
Linux file hierarchy. Files located directly under this tier are files which
are generally considered essential for system booting, repair, and restoration.

### `/usr`

The `/usr`, or *user directory*, holds read-only data that is useful for users
but is not necessary for system maintenance. For example, highly-important
programs such as Minecraft may be located under the `/usr` tier as it is not
necessary for basic system stability.

### `/usr/local`

The `/usr/local`, or *local directory*, is for locally-installed software. For
example, say you are working on a video game using Simple DirectMedia Layer
(SDL) but are having trouble with the library; you could download the library
source code, hack the source code to add some debugging statements, then
install a local copy of SDL into `/usr/local/lib` to test your video game
without upsetting any other video games that depend on the version of SDL in
`/usr/lib`.

## Common directories.

These directories are common to many tiers of the LFSH. Directories listed here
are not necessarily located in all tiers.

### `bin`

The `bin` directory contains architecture-dependent executable files; the "bin"
stands for "binary", not "bin" as in "Trash Bin". Binary files are executable
files that are written in a language that specific types of computers
(specifically, computers with the same *architecture*) can understand. When
run, these files are programs which can make the computer do... things; like
video games.

### `include`

The `include` directory contains *header files* for use in the programming
languages "C" and "C++". If you are not programming in either of these
languages, then you will likely not have to worry about this directory. The
directory is usually located in `/usr` and `/usr/local`, but not `/`.

### `lib`

The `lib` directory contains files which provide common functionality to
multiple programs, usually in the form of architecture-dependent binary data.
The "lib" stands for "library".

### `sbin`

The `sbin` directory contains architecture-dependent executable files that are
meant for administrator use only.

### `share`

The `share` directory contains data that is "architecture-independent"; this
means that the directory contains data that may be shared by multiple computers
with different architrecutres that are running the same distribution of Linux.
Note that data under this directory is likely *not* shareable between multiple
distributions (such as Ubuntu, Fedora, and Gentoo).

## Specific directories.

These are specific directories with the Linux filesystem that are noteworthy.

### `/boot`

Contains files essential for booting the Linux kernel. This usually includes
the kernel itself, the `initramfs`, and `System.map` files.

### `/dev`

This directory contains *device* files (note: "device", not "developer").
Device files may be thought of as "raw" interfaces to hardware devices. Several
common and important device files are:

- The `sd\*` family of files. These include things like your computer hard
  drives, USB storage media, and flash cards. Devices are generally listed in
  alphabetical order, with the first device as `sda`, followed by `sdb`, `sdc`,
  &c. Partitions within the device have the number of the partition as a suffix
  to the device name; for example, disk `sda` with three partitions would
  likely have entries `sda1`, `sda2`, and `sda3`.

- The `sr\*` files represent optical media such as CD/DVD reader/writers. Their
  suffix is a number rather than a letter.

- The `/dev/null` file is a place to banish program output; data that gets sent
  into the `null` device does not come out.

- The `/dev/random` and `/dev/urandom` devices provide a way to access
  kernel-generated random numbers. The `random` device is *buffered*, meaning
  that it will stop producing random numbers when it runs out of a special kind
  of input it uses called *entropy*; the `urandom` device is *unbuffered*,
  meaning that it will continue to produce random numbers even when it runs out
  of entropy (a discussion of entropy is outside the scope of this book;
  suffice it to say that entropy allows for the creation of high-quality random
  numbers). In general, you should use `random` when you need a few random
  numbers and `urandom` when you need many random numbers. 

- The `/dev/zero` device produces a never-ending stream of `0` bytes.

### `/etc`

This directory contains most of the system-wide configuration files. Almost all
of these files are plain-text and can thus be easily modified with a text
editor by the system administrator; normal users can usually still view most of
the files.

### `/home`

An optional directory that contains each user's individual data.

### `/media`

Most removable storage devices, such as USB sticks and SD cards, are mounted in
here in a subdirectory.

### `/mnt`

Temporary mount point; some distributions will use this directory instead of
`/media`. It is often unused by the average user.

### `/opt`

According to the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FSH), this directory is for
"Add-on application software packages". To be honest, I'm not quite sure what
this means, but within this directory on my system is a subdirectory for a
certain media-player-that-shall-not-be-named. Suffice it to say that this
directory isn't generally *too* important for average use. Also, if you can
figure out what the name could stand for (besides "optional", obviously),
please let me know.

### `/proc`

Mount point for a Linux "virtual" filesystem (in this context, a filesystem
that doesn't actually exist on the hard drive) that exports process-specific
and non-process-specific data. While there is lots of data exported via this
system, a couple noteworthy entries are:

- `/proc/cpuinfo`, which exports processor information.

- `/proc/meminfo`, which exports virtual memory information.

- `/proc/version`, which exports Linux version and distribution information.

It is also possible to interact with the Linux kernel by writing certain values
to specific files within this filesystem; for example, executing:

    echo 3 > /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches

as an administrator will de-allocate cached pages (if you don't know what I
said, then don't worry about it; it's a fairly esoteric use-case; just know
that there are ways to interact with the kernel via the `/proc` virtual
filesystem).

### `/root`

The equivalent of a `/home/root` directory for the administrative user.

### `/run`

Process that contains information that has accumulated since system boot.
Generally not important.

### `/sys`

A Linux virtual filesystem which exports kernel object information to
userspace. This usually consists of hardware, module, and driver information.
It is usually fairly difficult to decipher, though fun to look around; to make
sense of it, you'll have to scrounge up the appropriate documentation.

### `/tmp`

Directory for programs that require temporary files. The contents of this are
generally not of concern to the user.

### `/var`

Contains data that varies over time. This usually includes things such as
kernel boot logs, useful if the system crashed but is now working again.
Internal system mail is also often stored within this directory. This directory
is sometimes worth checking if the filesystem has run out of space; copious
amounts of kernel debugging via a poorly-written rogue driver can sometimes
fill up smaller filesystems.

# References

[Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)](http://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/fhs.shtml)
