title: Event Publicity 
category: blog
tags: guide
author: "Emily Dunham <dunhame@onid.oregonstate.edu>"
datetime: 2013-10-17 00:00:00
---

The Event Publicity Cheat Sheet
===============================

LUG runs or contributes to a variety of events, from Installfests to BarCamps
to regular outreach activities. This guide will be a work in progress --
please update it with what you learn as you try to implement its suggestions.

A month before the event: 
-------------------------
 
* Talk to whoever runs the mailing lists for the departments you're recruiting
  from, to make them aware of your event and get permission to post to their
  mailing lists closer to the time it's happening. For EECS, talk to Calvin. 

* Contact that Daily Barometer and KBVR (the campus radio station) to find out
  whether they can run ads for or articles about the event. Get permission to
  stick posters on Barometer kiosks.

* Design flyers (8.5x11") for posting around campus, and signs or banners to
  put outside the building on the day of the event. Get the signs or banners
  printed sooner rather than later. 

* Draft emails to relevant mailing lists about the event.

* If it coincides with the start of a term, make sure the event is mentioned
  in the handouts that we distribute when talking to classes about
  installfest.

* Contact leaders of relevant student clubs, depending on the event's theme. 
  Get their contact information from [this link][seac].

[seac]: http://oregonstate.edu/seac/sos/find_org

The week of the event: 
----------------------

* Actually send the emails to the mailing lists for which you got permission
  earlier. 

* Post flyers around campus, on MU tables and barometer kiosks if you got
  permission from the relevant authorities.

Day before event: 
-----------------

* If the weather looks good, write about the event in sidewalk chalk near the
  building where it'll take place. 

* Put up the signs or banners or sandwichboards to make the building
  noticeable.


After the event: 
----------------

* Update this guide to correct timing and recommendations for each publicity
  tactic. 
